# Digital Methods and Historical Scholarship

### Digital Methods

### Historical Scholarship
Digital Scholarship

Digital Methods
Even though, a lot of work has been done analyzing the State of the Union Addresses, there were few projects we could find that applied digital methods. Most of the work done on this subject is outdated and lacks the use of any digital tools, such as textual analysis. A lot of the work we found was over 20 years old, Because of this, we thought that a lot of the conclusions these scholars came to decades ago may prove to be outdated. The lack of digital projects on this topic proved frustrating at first, because we wanted some direction and an idea of where to start. However, we eventually realized how interesting it would be to run State of the Union speeches through textual analysis to try and come up with our own answer to the question, who was the first “modern president”? We thought that, because very little has been done one this topic in the realm of Digital Humanities, we could possibly offer some unique insight by applying digital methods to researching these speeches. Although we were not able to find any significant works that use digital methods on State of the Union address, we were able to find other projects related to ours that proved to be of great use to us.

The American Presidency Project
	When looking for similar projects that have been done in the past regarding this topic, the biggest one we found was The American Presidency Project. The creators of the site have amassed a huge database of information and documents on the American presidents. To date, the site contains more than 120,000 documents and is actively growing. Over the years, they have gathered and organized different documents regarding the presidents, dating all the way back to George Washington. The site has also gathered and stored all available election results by state and county leading up to the latest election. Although the site is primarily a database, it updates daily and it also tracks the progress of the current president and compares them to previous presidents. It also tracks the most viewed documents in the collection. Many of our ideas on how we should move forward with this project initially came from the site. They have all of the documents to read through and analyze, such as presidential speeches, party platforms, and addresses to congress. However, this was simply a collection of the data. We had the tools and knowledge necessary to analyze the data and take it a step further using textual analysis, to ask questions to make predictions, and to show the importance of a collection of data like this. The collection of documents from The American Presidency, combined with other written sources on the topic, helped us refine our topic, and gave us a direction to go in, as well as where experts in this field stood on the topic of rhetoric and the modern presidency.
	For our project, we are only examining State of the Union addresses and Addresses to a Joint Session of Congress, which make up 236 documents total. This is relatively small compared to not only other projects in the class, but what sites like The American Presidency project have collected over the years. The site was very through when collecting the documents that would eventually go up on the site. Most of the collections on the site are complete. This site is, to our knowledge the most complete database available on the topic of presidential documents and are the only site that have complete collections of certain sets of documents available for public use. This was important for our purposes early on as the collection of speeches we had from a previous class was incomplete. We were able to locate and obtain the rest of what we need using the database. The site also provides links to YouTube videos, and recordings if available for this speeches which could be a whole project in itself.
	It is easy to imagine the research, and projects that could be done looking specifically into other documents, or datasets. Examples could be, farewell addresses, or party convention speeches. That is where we come in. The American Presidency Project has gone through the trouble of collecting, organizing, storing, and making this information available. This makes our job (analyzing the data) a lot easier than it would have been if we had to go through the trouble of hunting these documents down. Our project is only a tiny fraction of what could be done using this site as a starting point. As documents like this become more widely available, it makes the job of asking questions, and analyzing them that much easier. This is especially true for other projects that had a lot more data to go through than we did.

Historical Scholarship
	As previously stated, we are heavily focusing on presidential rhetoric and the modern presidency. Because of this, most of our effort was spent looking at works from others who analyzed presidential rhetoric in the past. Luckily for us, a good amount of work as already been done on this topic. However most of this work seems to be outdated. Even though, the bulk of our data and direction came from The American Presidency Project, we were able to find many scholarly articles that were able to help us refine what it is we were even looking for. When the idea for the project was first coming to together, we were at a loss of what questions we even wanted to ask. However, the large pool of existing written research helped move us in the right direction. Once we were able to look through all of the sources we collected, we saw a large variety of opinions on not only the importance of presidential rhetoric, but also on the modern presidency in general. There is much debate throughout the field on who was the first modern rhetorical president. Some argue it was Woodrow Wilson, who is credited with the invention of public administration as well as brought back the trend of in person addresses. Others argue that it was Franklin D. Roosevelt, who permanently brought back the trend of in person addresses, as well as heavily relying on rhetoric to unite the country during WWII. Many questions arise when looking at just these two former presidents. However, when you include every president from Roosevelt to Trump the amount of questions grows significantly. Is there a correlation between the kind of rhetoric in the State of the Union Addresses, and approval ratings? How did rhetoric change when Wilson and Roosevelt brought back the trend of in person addresses compared to just written speeches? Who deserves the title of the first modern rhetorical president? Aside from the numerous articles on presidential speeches and rhetoric, we looked at the 236 State of the Union Addresses hoping to draw our own conclusions, using the sources as a place to begin and build off. To gather the data and sources needed to bring the project to fruition, we had to rely heavily and digital methods. Many of our sources, as well as the 236 state of the union address we analyzed, were gathered from various online databases. From the beginning, we had a good pool of information to work with. The rest of the data was easily accessible from online sources.

Gathering Sources
	The text of every State of the Union Address was the most important bit of data we needed because our questions and hypotheses required an analysis of the speeches themselves. That site has proved to be the most important source for us, and we likely would have had a much harder time doing this without it.
	It is important to mention that we did not just jump into this blind. We took a good bit of time collecting scholarly sources from databases such as JSTOR and Worldcat. The purpose of this was to find any similar work that has been done in the past. That way we could have a better idea of where to start, as well as what we should expect to find. Like most areas of history, scholars were divided on a number of issues. As a result, we took them all into consideration before we began to do any analysis on our own. One of the main topics of debate was the first modern rhetorical president. This question alone opens the door to many other questions that could asked and attempted to answer. Comparing just the speeches of Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt could lead to some interesting findings on the topic of rhetoric which could help us answer the question of who should be considered the first modern rhetorical president. The sources we gathered also debated on the effect of rhetoric in presidential speeches and how big of a factor it was on things like the president’s success at passing legislation, approval ratings, as well as how that specific president is remembered today.
	In the end, the sources lead to more questions. However, this is not necessarily a bad thing. It gave us a good idea of where we need to start. It also gave us a glimpse of the possibilities if this project were to be taken further using digital methods. Perhaps the biggest benefit of collecting so many sources on the topic of rhetoric was it helped us narrow down what we want to focus on specifically. We were most interested in the question of the modern rhetorical presidency and how it differs from older presidencies. Our goal was to not only compare the speeches of Wilson and Roosevelt, but also compare the speeches given in person by modern presidents to the written ones given by presidents in the past. How are they different? How do they differ on the way they speak, as well as the rhetoric they use? We hypothesize that “modern presidents” utilize the power of rhetoric much more effectively than older presidents in the past who submitted written speeches. As we moved into the modern age and we had things like radio and later television and internet people were much more aware of what was going on in Washington. As a result, the president became more of a public figure than he was before. Over time this led to changes in rhetoric, and body language became more important. Today it seems people value well-spoken charismatic leaders over leaders with legitimately good ideas, and this alone has changed the office of the president immensely.

Modern Rhetorical Presidency
	As previously mentioned, there is a lot of debate on topic of the modern president, specifically who was the first modern rhetorical president, and why? Our sources on this topic go back and forth between Woodrow Wilson, and Franklin D. Roosevelt. A lot of the evidence they use to support their claims come from the content of their speeches, and other addresses. The most compelling argument comes from Ryan L. Teten, who argues that beginning with early twentieth-century presidents the length of speeches and addresses drops significantly, and the president increasingly attempts to identify himself as one of the public in the speech.1 Teten argues that the first president to use this strategy regularly was Woodrow Wilson, which should make him the first modern rhetorical president. Another well-known voice on the topic, and a critic of Teten’s conclusion, is Chad Murphy of the University of California. Like Teten, he argues that a modern president can be characterized by greater use of group words and shorter addresses, which began under Woodrow Wilson.2 However, he expands on the sample size which leads him to conclude that the trend does not truly start until after Franklin D. Roosevelt presidency. Therefore, Roosevelt should be considered the first modern president not because he was the first do it, but because he was the first to do it well enough to start the trend.
	One thing that we initially noticed was that most of the work on the modern presidency seems to lack any mention of factors like radio, television and internet, and how it changed the office of president and effected how they used rhetoric. This is likely because most presidents after Roosevelt followed the trend of using group words and trying to identify with the general populace which may have led to presidents after him to be ignored. Using textual analysis, we noticed trends started by other presidents after Franklin Roosevelt. Using textual analysis gave us a different perspective, and we think revealed more to us than just trying to read an interpret the speeches by hand like those before us.
	In the end, I think we were able to successfully expand on the work of those scholars before us, or at the very least create a blueprint on how we think it should be done. We think that modern inventions like radio, television, and internet had a much greater effect on presidential rhetoric than many scholars give them credit for. We do, however, think that they are correct in their characterization of the modern rhetorical president. Shorter speeches, more public appearances, and identifying with the public are all trends that we could find through our analysis. However, with digital methods we were able to spot other trends started by more recent presidents. We think that technology was a driving factor in this due to televised speeches, and debates, and later the internet. This led to presidents speaking differently and using terms the general populace could easily understand, as well as gaining approval by attempting to show the middle class that they were one of them. Although this is a highly refined and focused topic it is easy to see how one could expand on it. A whole project could be done on rhetoric and speech on just the Trump presidency up to this point. We hope to see more digital methods utilized in historical research like this moving forward. Although we only used textual analysis, we were able to draw our own conclusion which was different from those before us. We imagine that even more questions could be answered, and trends uncovered by utilizing other forms of digital research.
