# Initial Findings

The American Presidency Project’s (APP) data set of State of the Union Messages to Congress allow us to see trends, while they may not explicitly show causation, are nonetheless interesting and provide some context regarding a President’s era, administration, and his way of communication.

In looking at the table provided by the APP that displays the timeline of the State of the Union speeches we can see that Thomas Jefferson started the long trend of only sending the speech as a written message to Congress. The preference for written messages continued through President William Howard Taft. From President Woodrow Wilson through Jimmy Carter, sitting Presidents used a mixed of both written and oral State of the Union messages during their time in the White House. President Ronald Reagan restarted the trend of always delivering the State of the Union as a speech to Congress that continues up to President Donald Trump.

In a brief reading of the first addresses to Congress by each President including and after Reagan, you can feel a difference between their first post-election address and their first State of the Union address. In their post-election addresses, Presidents use broad and imaginative phrases to describe the problems they are currently seeing in the country. They set it up in order to make the argument that they and their elected ideology will be the ones to fix these problems from there, moving into their first State of the Union speeches (the second speech of their Presidency), Presidents tend to use more specific language citing bills and people with whom they have worked with over the past year. They still share their vision for how the government should run, however they tend to highlight initiatives and details that they favor in their speech.

In working to analyze the difference between written and oral presidential State of the Union Speeches, there didn’t seem to be much meaningful difference between the two methods of presenting Congress with annual addresses. In trying to find and further similarities or interests, we could look personality profiles of the presidents to see if there are any connections between the Presidents, their administrations, and how they chose to deliver their speech. Possibly, it was just a matter of not bucking tradition.  

Moving past State of the Union delivery methods, there are other observations that can be drawn by directly analyzing the context of the Presidential State of the Union documents and transcripts. One interesting find that our group made in looking at the dataset, is the use of the word “jobs” in Presidential State of the Union speeches. Franklin Roosevelt was the first U.S President to mention the word jobs in one of his speeches. One can only assume that this was because of his New Deal and jobs plan his administration worked to implement after the Great Depression. A quote from FDR’s 1940 State of the Union Speech says “We will continue to carry on the processes of recovery, so as to preserve our gains and provide jobs at living wages.” In taking this project further, this could be an area where someone can compare FDR’s talk on jobs in his State of the Union speeches with his mentions on them in other communications as well as compare it to his record on jobs.

Another interesting find when analyzing State of the Union speech texts is regarding the word “terrorism”. President Lyndon Johnson was the President to use the word terrorism in his address to Congress. LBJ said “And this means reducing the terrorism and the armed attacks which kidnaped and killed 26,900 civilians in the last 32 months, to levels where they can be successfully controlled by the regular South Vietnamese security forces.” In fully completing this research project, we could look at the use of terrorism in Presidential speeches and analyze the mentions of terrorism abroad versus mentions of terrorism on U.S soil. Presidential foreign policy positions and actions can provide context to what each President says in their speeches regarding terrorism. 
